# [Introduction to programming](https://www.coursera.org/learn/programming-with-javascript/lecture/qUwaB/introduction-to-programming)

> [!INFO] Computer Program
> A computer program is just a series of instructions based on some rules. These instructions tell a computer what to do under some specific circumstances and they are written to perform a specific set of tasks. 

All these programs are called ==software== and are in one way or another. Running on physical machines which are referred to as ==hardware==. 

## Programming

Programming is simply the process of writing the steps a computer needs to take to complete a certain task. To program these instructions, we use programming languages. 

> [!INFO] Programming language
> A programming language is sort of like a bridge that we use to facilitate communication between computers and people. 

For a computer to understand a programming language, it needs to save it somewhere in its random access memory. ==RAM== or on a disk in ==binary code==, which is represented by a series of zeros and ones. 

The binary code is a representation of machine language that a computer can understand. All of the zeros and ones in binary language represent electrical switches. 

## CPU

A computer's central processing unit, or CPU can comprehend these binary electrical signals and update itself accordingly. 

This machine language, with its series of zeros and ones, is known as a low level language because it's closer to being understood by a computer's CPU. 

There are also high level languages such as JavaScript, that needs to be interpreted, that is converted to binary code that a CPU will be able to work with.

---
# Why JavaScript?

> [!INFO] JavaScript
> JavaScript is a language that builds interactivity into web pages. It is literally the language of the web. 

Almost every website runs JavaScript in some form or another. The reason for this is the fact that since its very inception In 1995, JavaScript has been the main way to interact with web pages on the client side, the front and side of websites and web applications. 

Using JavaScript updates are displayed in real time on our devices. Some common examples include interactive maps and ==client side form validation==.

Over the years, there have been some alternatives to JavaScript, such as ==VBScript== and more recently TypeScript. But even typescript compiles down to JavaScript so browsers can understand it. 

Since JavaScript is one of the most widely available and frequently used methods for interacting with the browser on the client side, the language became immensely popular. 

## what is it that makes JavaScript so integral to modern browsers?

JavaScript is currently the only computer language that allows us to directly interact with our web pages dynamically on the client. It's baked into the browser. 

Its enduring popularity is down to the rules of backwards compatibility, which states that all websites that were built in the past still need to work today. 

So removing JavaScript from the browser would effectively render millions of websites completely useless. This means that JavaScript is in the unique position of being one of several central pillars of web development. 

## Why to use?

One of the main reasons that developers use JavaScript is because of how easy it is to use. There are many programming languages where a newcomer needs to do a substantial amount of prep work to even get set up and ready to learn. 

However, with JavaScript it's as simple as opening the browser's developer tools and navigating to the console tab because every browser has a ==JavaScript engine== built in and you can interact with it using the ==console==. 

Another reason to learn and use JavaScript is because as we saw earlier, it's everywhere. JavaScript is used in almost every website there is. 

- It's used on the client side of sites as plain JavaScript also known as ==vanilla JavaScript==. 
- It fuels a myriad of JavaScript frameworks such as React, Vue, and D3.
- It's also used on the server as Node.js and more recently Deno.
- Another reason why people often choose JavaScript is that it's considered one of the more accessible programming languages. 
- It also has a wide development community to offer help and guidance. 

---
